docs: Add Architecture Overview Assets (#1780)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/block-node/architecture/architecture-overview.md

# Architecture Overview

The BlockNode is primarily designed to process gRPC streams of Block Items and distribute them efficiently across system
components and to clients using a plugin-based architecture for additional service processing.

## Key Concepts

- **Event-Driven:** BlockNode receives gRPC streams of Block Items, which are distributed to plugins and drive the processing logic.
- **Plugin System:** All major features are implemented as plugins, conforming to the `BlockNodePlugin` interface.
  Plugins are dynamically loaded and initialized at startup.
- **Messaging:** The `BlockMessagingFacility` is responsible for distributing event messages (via LMAX Disruptor) to registered handlers defined in plugins.
- **Block Management:** Block storage and access is managed by implementation of `BlockProviderPlugin` and one

>   implementation of the `HistoricalBlockFacility`, which aggregate multiple block providers and exposes a unified view of available blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Block Management:** Block storage and access is managed by implementations of
  `BlockProviderPlugin` in cooperation with one implementation of the
  `HistoricalBlockFacility`. Together these aggregate multiple block providers and
  expose a unified view of available blocks.
```

- **BlockVerification:** Blocks are verified for integrity using the `VerificationServicePlugin` which build the virtual
  merkle tree and validate the block proof prior to persistence.

## Modules

The repo structure is organized into multiple Java modules, each encapsulating specific functionality.
Plugin modules are loaded dynamically at runtime using the JPMS service loader mechanism.

### Main Modules

The following modules under `block-node` directory form the core of the BlockNode system.
- `app`: Main application logic and entrypoint (`BlockNodeApp.java`).
- `spi`: Service Provider Interfaces for plugins and facilities.
- `messaging`: Core messaging facilities for distributing block items.

> - `health`: Health check and monitoring plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `health`: Kubernetes health check plugin.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think that health checks are only useful for Kubernetes

Author: Agreed but in our current implementation would you say it's main value is for k8s deployment or what other cases would you highlight to note here?

Reviewer: We _really_ shouldn't try to expose health checks to clients, in my opinion.
They're, by nature, a security risk and should always be restricted to the orchestration system (in our case Kubernetes).

The Status API is what clients can call to understand whether they should attempt to connect to a Block Node.

### Additional Modules

The following modules provide additional functionality and are loaded as plugins if present:
- `block-access`: Interfaces and implementations for accessing block data.
- `block-providers`: Implementations for various block storage backends.
- `s3-archive`: S3-based block archiving plugin.
- `server-status`: Server status monitoring plugin.
- `stream-publisher`: Stream publishing plugin for external systems.
- `stream-subscriber`: Stream subscribing plugin for external systems.

> - `verification`: Block verification plugin.

Reviewer: Just some consistency changes
```suggestion
- `block-access`: Plugins for accessing block data.
- `block-providers`: Plugins for block storage backends.
- `s3-archive`: Plugins for S3-based block archiving.
- `server-status`: Plugins for a server status API.
- `stream-publisher`: Plugins for a stream publishing API.
- `stream-subscriber`: Plugins for a stream subscription API.
- `verification`: Plugins for block verification.
```

## System Architecture Diagram

The overall architecture of BlockNode is illustrated below:
![block-node-app-logic](./../../assets/block-node-app-logic.svg)
or
![block-node-app-logic-1](./../../assets/block-node-app-logic-1.svg)

Additional details regarding Service interactions are illustrated in [Block-Node-Nano-Services](./../../assets/Block-Node-Nano-Services.svg) diagram.

## Plugins
BlockNode's functionality is extended through a variety of plugins, each implementing the `BlockNodePlugin` interface. Key plugins include:
- **BackfillPlugin:** Guarantees the stored block stream is complete by retrieving missing blocks from other Block Nodes.
- **BlockAccessServicePlugin:** Provides block retrieval APIs.
- **BlocksFilesHistoricPlugin:** Archives and retrieves older persisted blocks.

> - **BlocksFilesRecentPlugin:** Handles block persistence, retrieval, and deletion of recently streamed blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **BlocksFilesRecentPlugin:** Handles block persistence and retrieval of recently streamed blocks.
```

Reviewer 2: it does deletion as well.

Author: Maybe if I say retention policies it's more clear?

Author: I think it is. If we highlighted persistence but don't highlight the existence of core retention policy ti may give the impressions that files under `file.recent` may stay forever.
It'd be confusing to a node operator who starts to see files magically disappear after a while

Reviewer: It's called `files.recent`; the name alone kind of implies ephemerality.
It's not big enough to block the PR, but the sentence, like some others, tries to say too much, and would still benefit from being split into two statements.
```
Handles block persistence and retrieval of recently streamed blocks. Blocks may also be removed in accordance with a retention policy.
```

> - **HealthServicePlugin:** Provides kubernetes health check endpoints.

Reviewer 2: are health check endpoints specific to Kubernetes?
```suggestion
- **HealthServicePlugin:** Provides health check endpoints.
```

Reviewer: Without orchestration it's unlikely anything will use the health endpoints.  They're pretty specific to K8S assumptions.

- **S3ArchivePlugin:** Archives blocks to S3 API compatible remote storage services.
- **ServerStatusServicePlugin:** Provides block node status API endpoints.
- **StreamPublisherPlugin:** Implements block stream publishing API as documented in the [communication protocol](./../../design/communication-protocol/README.md).

> - **SubscriberServicePlugin:** Implements the unverified block subscription API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SubscriberServicePlugin:** Provides an _unverified_ Block Subscription API.
```

- **VerificationServicePlugin:** Verifies incoming blocks for integrity prior to persistence.

For additional details on plugins, refer to the [Plugins](./plugins.md).

## How The Block Node Works

> 1. **Startup:** `BlockNodeApp` loads configuration, initializes plugins, registers API services and starts the web server.

Reviewer: Plugins do some of these tasks after they are loaded...
```suggestion
1. **Startup:** `BlockNodeApp` loads configuration, loads plugins, and starts the web server.
1. **Plugin Initialization** Loaded plugins initialize and register API services.
```

Author: According to the API BlockNodeApp calls `init` and `start` on plugins.
Should we say "loads, initializes and starts"?
Or just "initializes and starts loaded plugins"?

2. **Event Distribution:** Incoming gRPC block streams from a publisher are received and passed to `BlockMessagingFacility`,
   which distributes block items via a block items ring buffer to registered plugins. Additionally, registered plugins may

>    put notification events onto a notification ring buffer to inform other services of available actions.

Reviewer: Trying to do too much in one bullet point.
It may be good to split up.
```suggestion
2. **Event Distribution:** Distribute events from APIs and internal notifications.
    1. Incoming gRPC block streams from a publisher are received and passed to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
   1. Block items are distributed via a block items ring buffer to registered plugins.
   1. Plugins may publish notification events to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
       1. Notifications are distributed via a notification ring buffer to registered plugins.
```

> 3. **Plugin Processing:** Each registered plugin processes block items and notifications independently, enabling modular and extensible workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Plugin Processing:** Each registered plugin processes block items and notifications independently, enabling dynamic, asynchronous, and extensible workflows.
```

## API Data Flows

Multiple API data flows occur within BlockNode, primarily centered around block item processing and distribution. Key flows include:
- **Block Stream Publish API Flow:** Incoming block items from gRPC streams are handled via the `StreamPublisherPlugin` and distributed to plugins via the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
- **Block Access API Flow:** Block access requests from gRPC clients are routed to the appropriate block provider plugins for retrieval.

> - **Block Stream Subscription API Flow:** Block streams are served to subscribers via the `SubscriberServicePlugin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Block Stream Subscription API Flow:** The unverified block stream is served to subscribers via the `SubscriberServicePlugin`.
```

- **S3ArchivePlugin:** Archives blocks to S3 API compatible remote storage services.
- **ServerStatusServicePlugin:** Provides block node status API endpoints.
- **StreamPublisherPlugin:** Provides a block stream publishing API as documented in the [communication protocol](./../../design/communication-protocol/README.md).
- **SubscriberServicePlugin:** Provides an _unverified_ Block Subscription API.
- **VerificationServicePlugin:** Verifies incoming blocks for integrity prior to persistence.

For additional details on plugins, refer to the [Plugins](./plugins.md).

## How The Block Node Works

1. **Startup:** `BlockNodeApp` loads configuration, loads plugins, registers API services and starts the web server.
2. **Event Distribution:** Distribute events from APIs and internal notifications.

- Incoming gRPC block streams from a publisher are received and passed to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
- Block items are distributed via a block items ring buffer to registered plugins.
- Plugins may publish notification events to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
- Notifications are distributed via a notification ring buffer to registered plugins.

> 

Author: Spotless has evolved since you last tried maybe cause it still picked it up and removed the indentation
